[weave] Alerts on monitors page DOCS-1938 (#2261)
wandb/docs: weave/guides/evaluation/automations.mdx

---
title: "Set up automations"
description: "Create event-driven automations that trigger actions based on monitor metrics and trace activity."
---

Automations let you define event-driven rules that trigger actions when specific conditions are met in your project. Instead of manually watching dashboards for metric changes, you configure an automation once, and W&B Weave runs an action for you when the event occurs. Use cases include:

- **Threshold alert**: Send a Slack notification when a monitor's average score crosses a threshold.
- **Regression detection**: Send an alert when a scorer detects a drop in accuracy or an increase in toxicity.
- **Deployment gate**: Trigger a webhook when a quality metric exceeds a confidence threshold over a rolling window.
- **Operational monitoring**: Send an alert when error rates or latency metrics change.

You manage automations in the Weave UI, with no code changes required.

## Create an automation

> Create an automation in three steps: configure the triggering event, select the action to perform, and review a summary before saving.

Author: ```suggestion
Create an automation by configuring the triggering event and selecting what action to take.
```

### Prerequisites

> The triggering event (such as an Op or a monitor) and the action (such as a Slack integration) should exist prior to creating the automation that connects them.

Author: ```suggestion
The triggering event (such as an Op or a monitor) and the action (such as a Slack integration) must exist before you create the automation that connects them.
```

- In Weave, set up an [Op](/weave/guides/tracking/create-call) or a [monitor](/weave/guides/evaluation/monitors) of interest.

> - In your Team Settings, set up a [Slack integration](models/automations/create-automations/slack#add-a-slack-integration) or a [webhook](/models/automations/create-automations/webhook#create-a-webhook).

Author: ```suggestion
- In your Team Settings, set up a [Slack integration](/models/automations/create-automations/slack#add-a-slack-integration) or a [webhook](/models/automations/create-automations/webhook#create-a-webhook).
```

The action configuration defines what action happens when the event condition is met.

To configure the action:
1. In the **Step 2 of 3** panel, configure:
    - **Team**: Select the team that wants to receive the notification.
    - **Action type**: Select the type of action to perform, such as sending a **Slack notification**.
    - **Action details**: Depending on the action type, provide the required configuration:
        - For Slack notifications, select the **Slack channel** to send the notification to.
        - For webhooks, provide the **Webhook** name and **Payload**.
2. Click **Next step** to proceed to the summary.

### Step 3: Summary

The summary step displays a complete overview of the automation before you save it.

To save:
1. Configure the automation metadata:
    - **Automation name**: Provide a name for the automation that will be displayed in the Automations table.
    - **Description** (Optional): Add a description to help identify the automation's purpose.
2. Click **Create automation** to create the automation.

The new automation appears in the Automations table on the Automations page.

## Create an automation from a monitor

> You can also create automations directly from a monitor's detail view. This approach pre-fills the event configuration with the monitor's context, which makes the setup faster.  Before you create the automation, set up a [Slack integration](models/automations/create-automations/slack#add-a-slack-integration) or a [webhook](/models/automations/create-automations/webhook#create-a-webhook) that you want to use as your selected action.

Author: ```suggestion
You can also create automations directly from a monitor's detail view. This approach pre-fills the event configuration with the monitor's context, which makes the setup faster.  Before you create the automation, set up a [Slack integration](/models/automations/create-automations/slack#add-a-slack-integration) or a [webhook](/models/automations/create-automations/webhook#create-a-webhook) that you want to use as your selected action.
```

---
title: "Set up automations"
description: "Create event-driven automations that trigger actions based on monitor metrics and trace activity."
---

> Automations let you define event-driven rules that trigger actions when specific conditions are met in your project. Instead of manually watching dashboards for metric changes, you configure an automation once, and W&B Weave runs an action for you when the event fires. Use cases include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automations let you define event-driven rules that trigger actions when specific conditions are met in your project. Instead of manually watching dashboards for metric changes, you configure an automation once, and W&B Weave runs an action for you when the event occurs. Use cases include:
```

> - **Threshold alerts**: Send a Slack notification when a monitor's average score crosses a threshold.

Reviewer: These may be better as singular.

- **Regression detection**: Alert your team when a scorer detects a drop in accuracy or an increase in toxicity.
- **Deployment gates**: Trigger a webhook when a quality metric exceeds a confidence threshold over a rolling window.

> - **Operational monitoring**: Notify on-call engineers when error rates or latency metrics change.

Reviewer: Maybe there is a way to make this a simple noun like the others.

Author: check if I addressed your concern, not sure...

> Automations require no code changes to your application. Set them up using the Weave UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You manage automations in the Weave UI, with no code changes required.
```

## Create an automation

> Create an automation in three steps: configure the triggering event, select the action to perform, and review a summary before saving.

Reviewer: Is it necessary to separate the review step? I wonder if we can converge on a way to explain it. I've been working on an [automation doc revamp](https://github.com/wandb/docs/pull/2249) and here is what I came up with. Interested in your thoughts. The Mermaid diagrams are externalized to snippets.

Author: by "separate the review step" I assume you mean the third step I mention? since it is a 3 part modal, and the 3rd pane of the modal (sorry, drawer ;) ) is to review, i think it would be more confusing *not* to separate it.
As for the link, there are a lot of pages in that PR you link - could you be more specific to what part your comparing ? thx

Reviewer: I don't think the reader is going to hold you to it in this summary / mental map builder. I would consider the confirmation to be the last substep of step 2.

### Prerequisites

> Automations can be sourced from either Ops or Monitors. If you want to alert on a monitor, your [monitor](/weave/guides/evaluation/monitors) should be created prior to creating the automation.

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

1. In Weave, set up an [Op](link) or a [monitor](link).
2. In your team, set up a [Slack integration]() or a [webhook](). 
3. In Weave, [create an automation](link).

I think maybe you need to use only the "[Add a Slack integration](https://docs.wandb.ai/models/automations/create-automations/slack#add-a-slack-integration)" or [Create a webhook](https://docs.wandb.ai/models/automations/create-automations/webhook#create-a-webhook) specific sections. The "Create an automation" part will happen in Weave instead of Models or Registry.

WDYT?

Author: thx, yes, i guess the prereqs were a bit muddy. and those are definitely more precise links.  made a second pass blending the two strategies...

If you want to trigger a Slack notification or webhook when the threshold is met, those should be created prior to creating the automation.

- For more details on setting up Slack automations, see [Create a Slack automation](/models/automations/create-automations/slack).
- For more details on setting up webhooks, see [Create a webhook automation](/models/automations/create-automations/webhook).

### Step 1: Event configuration

The event configuration defines what condition triggers the automation. You select a monitor metric, a time window, and a threshold.

> To start creating an automation:

Author: ```suggestion
To create an automation:
```

### Step 2: Action configuration

The action configuration defines what action happens when the event condition is met.

To configure the action:
1. In the **Step 2 of 3** panel, configure:
    - **Team**: Select the team that wants to receive the notification.
    - **Action type**: Select the type of action to perform, such as sending a **Slack notification**.
    - **Action details**: Depending on the action type, provide the required configuration:
        - For Slack notifications, select the **Slack channel** to send the notification to.
        - For webhooks, provide the **Webhook** name and **Payload**.
2. Click **Next step** to proceed to the summary.

### Step 3: Summary

The summary step displays a complete overview of the automation before you save it.

To save:
1. Configure the automation metadata:
    - **Automation name**: Provide a name for the automation that will be displayed in the Automations table.
    - **Description** (Optional): Add a description to help identify the automation's purpose.
2. Click **Create automation** to create the automation.

The new automation appears in the Automations table on the Automations page.

> ## Create an automation from a monitor

Reviewer: This is the section I meant for step 3 from above.

Author: step 3 i didn't really feel fit(/didn't follow) since it was in a section titled Prerequisites for creating an automation - kinda cyclic/recursive. (e.g citing the thing as step 3 in prereqs for the thing the prereq is a prereq of)

maybe i need to clarify this, but 'creating an automation from a monitor' is just a minor subset of steps from 'creating a automation' (e.g. it is a shortcut of one selection box).  its an alternative method. It's frankly not very useful, but mentioned for completeness.

Reviewer: Before you can create the automation in Weave, you need a) a monitor, and b) either a webhook or a Slack _integration_ configured in your team. That's what I mean. Maybe we are on the same page after Slack conversation.

2. In the Monitors table, click the name of the monitor to open its detail panel.
3. In the monitor detail panel, select the **Automations** tab to see any existing automations for this monitor.
4. In the Automations section toolbar, click **Create automation**.
5. In the **Create automation** panel, the event configuration is pre-filled with the selected monitor's details. Adjust the configuration as needed:
    - **Metric**: Select the metric to measure for the alert.
    - **Metric Threshold**: Define the condition that triggers the automation. Select a comparator (such as "is above") and provide the threshold value (such as `0.9`).
    - **Window**: Configure the window used to trigger the automation to be either **Time-based** or **Count-based**. Select the aggregation function (such as **Average**) and the rolling period (such as **1 day**).
    - **Aggregation**: Set the aggregation function (such as mean, median, minimum) to apply to metric values within the window before comparing to the threshold.
6. Click **Next** and complete the remaining steps (select action and save) as described in [Create an automation](#create-an-automation).

## View and manage automations

> All automations in your project are listed on the **Automations** page. The table displays the following information for each automation:

Reviewer: Is this in your W&B project or your Weave project?

Author: well a Weave project IS a W&B project   ?  unless you mean Models project or Weave project...  and honestly, i'm not sure.  some of these features lately work for blended projects - e.g. both Models and Weave tabs show up on the side nav.  so yeah, presumably if someone has a blended project and loaded Automations here they would show...    so i think I'd rather leave it unspecified....  or i don't understand your question :)

Reviewer: OK after looking at the UI a bit, it looks like it is similar to get to the team settings from Weave UI as Models UI. It's only Registry that is the odd one out.

### Prerequisites

> The triggering event (such as an Op or a monitor) and the action (such as a Slack integration) should exist prior to creating the automation that connects them.

Reviewer: This is kind of passive (should exist) and kind of redefines what the word prerequisite means.
